This is Daryl Lane. And this is Bill Vernon. And we'll be talking with some
prominent authors about the New Wave and science fiction. The New Wave, which
began in the mid-1960s, was simply a new way of writing science fiction. Yes,
and that newness was seen in many areas. There was often something unusual, for
instance, about the style. Character and psychology were given much more
emphasis. And also the New Wave treated themes, such as sex and religion, that
science fiction hadn't really touched before. Right. And the authors who wrote
about these themes were interested in changing the traditional science fiction
formulas, which had been around since the pulp era of the 1920s, 30s, and 40s.
You know that type of story. It's one in which science is glorified and the hero
rescues Earth from hordes of menacing, bug-eyed monsters. Frederik Pohl, who's
been an author, an editor, and an agent in the field of science fiction, has a
few things to say about that change. The New Wave was an attempt, I guess, 15
years ago or more, of a number of writers to break away from the traditional
kinds of science fiction. In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science
fiction anymore. They wanted to call it speculative fiction or call it nothing
at all. And they were interested primarily in writing about inner space rather
than outer space. And secondarily, a lot of them in things like the drug culture
and rock music and so on. But in the rather bitter internal struggle that went
on in science fiction, a lot of people take sides one way or the other. I think
everyone was deeply affected. We need to remember here that the New Wave wasn't
really a planned and deliberate movement by a unified group of writers. One of
the principal proponents of the New Wave, author Norman Spinrad, believes it was
just a bunch of diverse writers doing their own thing. It was an old wave, but
there was never, as a coherent philosophy in the school of science fiction, but
there was never a New Wave in the same sense. There were a lot of waves. There
were a lot of different people doing a lot of different things. The people that
were identified as the New Wave were very diverse. I mean, what I was actually
writing, it's very different to say what Tom Dish was writing, or Ballard, or
Zelazny, Delaney, or also identified as New Wave writers. This stuff is much
more, you know, Zelazny, and Delaney, and myself, and Ballard, and Aldiss, and
Mike. We were all, there were more differences between our work than between our
work taken into totality and the old stuff. There was more difference within the
so-called New Wave than there was within the so-called old wave. But Spinrad
also thinks the New Wave was tightly connected to what was happening in society.
And of course, this mirrored the cultural climate at the time. It mirrored what
was happening politically. It mirrored what was happening in music. It mirrored
what was happening in movies. It was a phenomenon that went through the Western
civilization as a whole. Some authors maintain that the New Wave is now dead.
Five-time Hugo winner Larry Niven, the author of Ringworld, thinks there's a
good reason for its demise. The New Wave is a very persuasive thing. And very
easy to use to justify bad stories. I think that's what killed it. Not that
increased characterization and experiments with typography and story format are
a bad thing in themselves, but it's so easy to use New Wave to justify a bad
story. It was bound to glass.
That may be so, but lots of others feel that the influence of the New Wave is
still around, though its presence isn't as intense as before. It's left its mark
on the field, no doubt about that. Science fiction has been broadened, maybe
enhanced somehow because of it. Frederik Pohl states it well. And the New Wave,
if nothing else, taught a bunch of old dinosaurs like Azimov and Heinlein and
me, that there were non-traditional ways of constructing a novel. See, most
of us had grown up when science fiction was in the pulp magazines, and most of
it was written according to some variant of a pulp formula. Well, it turned out
that wasn't necessary. And I think the New Wave is responsible for teaching us
that.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane and David Carson. Of all the themes handled
by science fiction authors, that of alien contact has been one of the most
consistently popular and fascinating. For a good reason, too. Aliens have always
been one of the biggest attractions of science fiction, whether they be the
hostile bug-eyed monsters of the old pulp magazines or the friendly creatures of
close encounters of the third kind. And they become even more fascinating when
you find them in what some people call a first contact story. First contact, as
the term implies, describes the very first meeting between humans and an alien
species. In the past, stories of alien contact were usually written as
thrillers, with the sole and simple intention of scaring readers. H.G. Wells'
The War of the Worlds is probably the best example of that type of story. But
that's changed. Many contemporary writers have provided more thoughtful
treatments of aliens, deepening the realism and the significance of narratives
of alien contact. Of course, before you can have a story of alien contact, you
must first have some aliens. One of the most provocative descriptions of aliens
in all of science fiction is found in Larry Niven's and Jerry Pournelle's The Mote
in God's Eye, considered by many to be the finest of all first contact stories.
The success of this book is largely due to the unique and ingenious aliens, the
Moties, that Niven created for the story. It's interesting though that Niven
says he doesn't really create aliens for a story, but suggests that it's the
other way around. But I always design aliens for themselves. I almost never
design an alien to match a story. The story, some story will eventually include
the alien. The alien stands for himself. There are two particularly fascinating
things that Niven incorporated into these Moties. One is the fact that they are
not symmetrical. They have a head, torso, legs and arms, as humans do, but the
arms are disproportionate. One is small and thin, and the other is large and
powerful. Right. Niven says he took that idea from studying the structures of
living creatures on Earth. In that case, I had the idea that I was following a
progression with a protozoan, with an amoeba. You get radial symmetry inside and
out. Move up a goodly distance and you find starfishes with radial symmetry on
the outside and bilateral symmetry on the inside. Move up a little further, you
find flat worms and worms of all stents. At the level of bilateral symmetry
inside and out. Go as far as a human, you find bilateral symmetry on the outside
and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside. The lungs look
symmetrical. The kidneys look symmetrical. The intestines look like somebody
dropped a plate of spaghetti. I tried to move on to the next step.
Bilaterally unsymmetrical on the outside. And I got the original Motie, which
was the engineer's one. The other ingenious idea Niven developed for the Moties
is the way they construct and use machines. They're highly skilled tool users,
but they have no standard pre-manufactured machines, parts, or tools. They
simply alter or reshape whatever they find around them at the time to suit their
needs. And Niven says that particular idea just came to him. It seemed
interesting and even logical. I was just playing with ideas at that point. And
that one seemed like a fun one. It also seemed likely enough. If you've got a
critter with not much intelligence except in the direction of tool making and
tool altering, then why not? The thing has to keep testing its ability or it
will lose it. It might as well be designing something every time it needs a
specific machine. Besides the ingenuity Niven demonstrated in creating the
Moties, he and Pournelle also used some unexpected twists into the first contact
theme. A reader interested in alien contact cannot afford to overlook the moat
in God's eye.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. Today we begin an interview with author Larry Niven.
Even a casual reader of science fiction, if asked to name
his favorite authors, would almost certainly mention the name of Larry Niven.
Niven's popularity rests on a solid and extensive body of work, but one
particular novel seems to have captivated science fiction fans. That casual
reader who named Niven as one of his favorite authors would likely pick
Ringworld as Niven's finest work. The Ringworld is an immense ring, large enough
to hold three million Earths. It has a thousand-mile-high wall on each side to
hold in its atmosphere. It has continents and oceans. The Ringworld contains
trillions of inhabitants of different species and derives energy from the sun at
its center. Niven recalls where he obtained the idea for such a fantastic
structure. Oh, I ran across the concept Dyson sphere. Dyson, the mathematician,
came up with the concept Dyson shell, and he was misunderstood to some extent.
And so presently I ran across an article about Dyson spheres. Picture that as a
golf ball, 93 million miles in radius, with a sun at the center, and gravity
generators all around the outside, so he would live on the inside, terraform it
with oceans and soil and air. I ran across that, and I didn't like it. I thought
it could be improved. And I wound up with the Ringworld. Readers were fascinated
with the Ringworld. So fascinated, in fact, that they studied the science behind
it, and wrote to Niven about what seemed to be errors or inconsistencies in the
theory and design of the immense artifact. Call them errors and elaborations,
because some of them don't really fit the error thing. It's just something that
hadn't gotten into the original book. One of the errors was spotted by some MIT
students. It had to do with the instability of the Ringworld. I suspected the
Ringworld was unstable, and I suspected you'd need attitude jets. I was sure
that the Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit bizarre dramjets to be
used as attitude jets, which means you don't have a fuel problem at all. You're
burning the solar wind. But rapidly, some MIT people demonstrated that the
Ringworld was unstable, when they were chanting it in the halls at the next
Worldcon. The Ringworld is unstable. The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for
the instability. And they are horrifying. The Ringworld, a major solar flare
would have the Ringworld grinding against its sun in five years. Well, I worked
it into the plot. That was one elaboration or error. Even teenage readers
analyzed his Ringworld with a critical scientific eye. A high school class in
Florida got to work on the Ringworld. And their conclusion was that the
Ringworld's worst problem is that all the topsoil would wind up in the oceans in
about 3,000 years. There are no earthquakes on the Ringworld. No mountain
building forces. But in a sequel, Ringworld Engineers, Niven attempted to
correct such deficiencies. He devised a way to answer the criticism of the
Florida high schoolers. Okay, that's a tough one. I set up a spill pipe system
that runs the top, that runs the sea bottom muck from the sea bottoms under the
Ringworld and up over the edge of the rim wall. That even allows you some, uh,
some mind accumulation of, uh, useful metals. Fan response of that sort caused
Ringworld Engineers to be written. And although Niven once said he wouldn't
write any more in the Known Space series, the body of stories to which Ringworld
belongs, he's not so sure anymore. I've given up saying that the, uh, that the
Known Space series is dead. There's just no point in it. I've written five books
worth of Known Space stories since I said that.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Quote. We'll have more of Larry Niven on our next show.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. Today we continue our interview with author Larry Niven.
Author Larry Niven has produced a body of science fiction that has made him one
of the best-selling authors in the field. A fairly large portion of his work
falls into the known space series, a group of stories and novels with a
consistent chronology and overall evolving pattern to them. Such a series is
called a future history. Niven believes there are some peculiar attractions a
future history has for a science fiction author.
There had been future histories around. Poul Anderson and Robert Heinlein.
I'd say, I guess we've each evolved it somewhat independently, and the idea is
that if you carved out a consistent, workable future, it seems a shame to waste it
on one story. You put in the background, you want the background of a story
to seem bigger than it is. So there are things that are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why you go with it. And if
you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story and
allows you to elaborate on that background, sometimes you fall in love with the
background. And presently you've got a bunch of stories that link. Ringworld is
probably the best-known story in Niven's future history, but he's also written
some best-selling books that fall outside his Known Space series. Two of these,
The Mote in God's Eye and Lucifer's Hammer, were written in collaboration with
Jerry Pournelle. Collaboration for a creative writer presents some problems. How
is the work divided up, for instance? Is it hard to decide who writes what? Hard
sometimes, but it always resolves. The question is, who is most qualified to
write a given scene that we have both decided needs writing? Before we start, we
have the novel all laid out. We know what's going in virtually everywhere. And
if we don't, it feels like we do. And if we find out we don't, we elaborate as
we get to that section. Okay, the next question is, who is qualified to write a
given scene? Sometimes it's obvious. If we're dealing with a madman, he's mine.
If we're dealing with military operations, it's Jerry's. Aliens are generally
mine. Politics is generally Jerry's. Knowledge of history is generally Jerry's.
And a real evil son of a bitch, Jerry usually creates him, and I usually run
with him afterwards. But Niven resists classification, either as an author of
future histories or as a collaborator. He sometimes branches out into seldom
entered areas of science fiction. One of these areas is humor, something few
science fiction writers attempt. What does he think his most successful piece of
humor is? I suppose I could name, oh, Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex, which has
gotten me the most laughs. I suppose everybody seems to have read it, and those
who haven't have heard about it a cocktail party. Niven's ready eye for humor
can also be appreciated as he reveals that he's detected one of his own alien
creations from Ringworld, a disguised Pearson's Puppeteer, here on Earth. I have
reason to suspect the pair of puppeteers on Earth. Look at their
characteristics. Forget the shape. They must be masters of biology to hide that
peculiar three-legged, two-headed shape. But consider their characteristics.
They are cowards. That is, they want everything utterly safe. No corners on
anything. Everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world. They don't
even keep their world near a sun. Regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor,
which of course it is. So, desperate regard for safety. Plus an urge to meddle
in the lifestyles of other species. Driving urge to meddle with practically no
restraints attached. What does that remind you of? It seems nearly certain to me
that Ralph Nader is a Pearson's Puppeteer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.